Di 




? R 1 T ! Fv H 






1 1 1 u i Or 














a–  a–  '.'a– a– ' ,.........' a–  aˆ?a– ' 



THE 



BRITISH CONSTITUTION 



BY THE LATE 

AMOS DEAN, LL.D., 

Professor in the Albany Law School. 
Author of " History of Civilization," " Commercial Law," Etc. 




ROCHESTER, N. Y. 

lawyers' co-operative publishing company. 

1893. 



COPTRIGHT, 1883, 

By AMOS H. DEAN. 



E. R. Andrews, Printer ant> Rookbindep 









7H 



to 



00 

PREFACE. 



The British constitution is a subject worthy 
Bjthc most attentive study. The student of polit- 
ical philosophy will here reap rewards richly 
j compensating for any amount of labor and 
research. The joint result of Saxon and Nor- 
gman wisdom, it has traveled through its centu- 
aˆ? ries of experience, only to continually add 
_, strength to its foundations, beauty to its pro- 
tp portions, harmony in the action of its different 
"* forces, and the still increasing promise of per- 
petuity in the blessings it confers. It is the 
y largest monument of worldly wisdom which the 
A?? centuries have to bequeath to us. The science 
E of government itself has little to offer which is 
a not embraced in its past history, or its present 
o organization. No one can contemplate this 
3 stupendous and beautiful fabric, standing out in 
all its colossal proportions, and realize that at 
least thirty generations of men have been the 
architects that have reared it upward, story by 

238592 



4 PREFACE. 

story, without being deeply impressed with the 
great truth, thai all time-lasting structures can 
exist and l>e perpetuated only through those 
powers and enemies which are common to the 
race, and actually exercised through its organic 
life. It is thus that the deficiencies of one man, 
or one generation, are made good by the excess 
of power developed through another or others, 
so that, in the end. institutions are generally the 
work of the race of man, and not of the 
individual. 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. 

PACK 

Anglo-Saxon Institutions, - - 7 



CHAPTER II. 
Charters of Rights, ... -24 

CHAPTER III. 

Origin and Growth of the English Parliament, S8 

CHAPTER IV. 
Its Present Workings, - - aˆ? - 78 



The British Constitution. 



chapter I. 

ANGLO-SAXON INSTITUTIONS. 

The British constitution is to be considered: 

I. In its past history. 

II. In its present workings. 

In its past history our attention will mainly 
be directed: 

1. To its sources, the Anglo-Saxon institutions, 
in connection with the modifications introduced 
by the Norman conquest. 

2. The charters of rights successively wrested 
from the king by his principal barons. 

3. The origin and growth of the English par- 
liament, including the successive steps or stages 
by which the two houses attained their political 
power, and the principle of representation be- 
came firmly established. 

The Anglo-Saxon institutions were the growth 



8 l HK KKITIS1I CONSTITUTION. 

ttt' several centuries. Brought there originally 
by the hardy followers of Hengist and Horsa, 
they were essentially modified, and new ones 
originated in consequence of the peculiar posi- 
tion under which their dominion was established, 
and the circumstances by which they were 
always surrounded. They were compelled to 
sustain themselves among a conquered people, 
the Britons, and that fact no doubt created new, 
or greatly modified existing institutions. 

In respect of property and condition, there were 
three classes. Of these the first were slaves, who 
were probably mostly or wholly made up of the 
conquered Britons. The second were ceorls, who 
Avere freemen, and formed the bulk of the pop- 
ulation. The third were eorls or thanes, who 
formed the nobility or gentry," the former hav- 
ing reference to birth, while the latter derived 
his title through the possession of landed 
property: It was the ownership of landed 
property that mainly gave to the Saxon his 
standing and political rights. There was an 
aristocracy, but not limited to hereditary descent. 
It was not the birth, but the acquisition of a 

a™¦Creasy. 40. 41. 



ANGLO-SAXON INSTITUTIONS. 9 

defined amount of landed property, that trans- 
formed the ceorl into the thane. 

The lowest and simplest political division 
among the Saxons was the township,* which 
had its reeve or elective chief officer, and also 
four good and lawful men, who with him 
represented the township in the courts of the 
hundred and the shire. These were elected by 
the commonality, who also had the regulation 
of their own police. If any crime was com- 
mitted in their district they were bound to 
pursue and apprehend the offender. Each town- 
ship generally had its own local court, which 
was subordinate to the hundred court, and also 
to the shire, moot, or county court. These 
Saxon townships have very generaily given way 
to the Norman manors, and the modern par- 
ishes. 

The Saxon hundred was a mere territorial 
division, and was subdivided into tythings. 
Each hundred had its court, held monthly, and 
subordinate to the shire or county courts, which 
were held once a year, and were presided over 
by a bishop or earl. 

*Creasy 43. 



lo THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

Independent of the institution of slavery, 
there were two oppressive customs among the 
Saxons. One was the system of frank pledge, 
by which every man was bound to be enrolled 
in some tything, the members of which being. 
to a large extent, mutually responsible for each 
others' good conduct." The other was that 
every member of the commonality was bound 
to place himself in dependence upon some man 
of rank and wealth as his lord. Otherwise he 
was liable a–  to be slain as an outlaw. The result 
of this was that many of the ceorls were legally 
annexed to the lands of their lords, but in other 
respects were personally free. 

A large proportion of the population was 
devoted to agriculture. There were, however, 
some towns that had already acquired import- 
ance. These were called burghs, fortified 
places. In these, also, the free Anglo-Saxon 
spirit was manifested. The citizens elected 
from their own number their local officers, those 
necessary for the purposes of municipal govern- 
ment, at the head of whom was their borough 
reeve, who presided over their local courts, and 

.Creasy. 44. 



ANGLO-SAXON INSTITUTIONS. 11 

in time of war, led the armed citizens to the 
field. 

The trial by jury is an institution attributed 
to the Anglo-Saxons, and certainly its rudiments 
are traceable to Saxon jurisprudence. 

In regard to the government, the constitutions 
in the several states composing the heptarchy, 
and subsequently in the united kingdom, appear 
to have been much the same. 

At the head of the state was the king, but the 
descent of the crown was irregular. The form 
of an election seems to have been observed, and 
a coronation and acceptance by the people 
necessary.* 

When crowned and received, he was the 
national executive, and an essential part of its 
legislature. He received and expended the 
revenue; was the center and source of all juris- 
prudence; the chief of the nation's armies;! the 
head of its landed property; the lord of the free 
and of all burghs except such as he had granted 
to others. 

Coexisting with the king, if not anterior, and 
his elector, was the witenagemote, the great 

*Brougham m, 197. tTurner's Anglo-Saxons, in, 217. 



IS THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

council or assembly of the barons, who con- 
vened together on the summons of the king, and 
over whom the king himself presided. This 
great council of witan, or wise men, consisted of 
nobles, holding land, the superior thanes, arch- 
bishops, bishops, abbots and priors, and milites, 
or those who were afterwards called knights. 
There was in this council nothing like represen- 
tation, and hence nothing strictly resembling 
the modern parliament. It was an independent 
council, deriving its strength from the individual 
power of its members, not from their acting in 
a representative character. The English mon- 
archy has always had about it this interesting 
feature, viz: it has been the government of the 
king in council. Thus from the earliest periods 
the witan. or wise men, composed the council of 
the king, and the laws were made in the joint 
names of both. 

The witan elected the king from among the 
members of the blood royal; sometimes deposed 
him for misconduct; formed the supreme court 
of justice in civil and criminal cases; and ad- 
vised the king on questions of war or peace, 



ANGLO-SAXON INSTITUTIONS. 13 

and also on all important measures of govern- 
ment. 

The regular revenue was chiefly derived from 
the royal domains,.. and the direct taxes raised 
by the witenagemote. 

There was a regular church establishment, 
and a body of nobles, some of whom were dis- 
tinguished by their birth, others by their office. 

Thus the Anglo-Saxon government was an 
aristocratic monarchy, a kind of feudal aristoc- 
racy, in which the whole political power was 
shared between the sovereign and the nobles, 
clerical and lay.* The third estate, the com- 
mons, had no share whatever in the Anglo- 
Saxon form of government. 

We are now ready to contemplate the Nor- 
man. This constitutes the fourth element, 
foreign in its nature, which enters into the com- 
position of the English nation. The first in 
order was the Roman; the second, the Anglo- 
Saxon; the third, the Dane; and the fourth, the 
Norman. Each of these successively subdued, 
and for a time ruled in England. Of these, the 

aˆ?Brougham, m, 202. 



14 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

Danish was the least fruitful in results, while 
the Saxon was the most important and the most 
lasting; and the Norman, the next in order, as 
regards both its present and future conse- 
quences. 

The year 1066 was signalized by the over- 
throw of the Saxon monarch, and the accession 
of William the Conqueror to the English crown. 
A few days only transferred him from the Nor- 
man dukedom to the English throne. 

Normandy was a large province in France, 
bordering upon the English channel. A cen- 
tury and a half had rolled away since the Nor- 
mans under Rollo, their first duke, had con- 
quered, and obtained by treaty, this province, 
which they called Normandy. Here their stern 
northern nature had become modified and con- 
siderably ehanged by the new civilization that 
surrounded them, the new influences under 
which they were brought, and the circumstances 
under which they had existed for so long a 
period of time. Their national character had its 
bright and dark side. In the first we discern 
that orderly and intelligent spirit, "which made 
them establish and preserve in their province a 



ANGLO-SAXON INSTITUTIONS. 15 

regularity of government, system and law, 
which contrasted strongly with the anarchy of 
the rest of France. The Norman had a steady- 
fixity of purpose, a discernment of the necessity 
of social union and mutual self-sacrifice,* of free 
will among the individual members of a state 
for the sake of the common weal. In the sec- 
ond we perceive in the Norman nobility, pride, 
statecraft, merciless cruelty, and a coarse con- 
tempt for the industry, rights, and feelings of 
all whom they considered the lower classes of 
mankind." 

The institutions of continental Europe, took 
their shape, in the outset, from the conquest of 
the Roman provinces by the hordes of wander- 
ing barbarians ; the settlement in those prov- 
inces ; the new circumstances under which they 
were placed ; the new relations arising between 
the conquerors and the conquered ; and the 
modifying influence exerted by the institutions 
of the one over those of the other. The barba- 
rians brought with them no fixed and determin- 
ate form of social life,f and on the side of the 
Romans that life was actually dying of inanition. 

a™¦Creasy, 55. *GuIzot. Representative Government, 281. 



It! THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

Hence long disorders arose, the reign of force 
and dismemberment of sovereignty. 

The Norman conquest of England broughl 
with it no such results. Between the Normans 
ami Saxons existed many points of resemblance. 
They had the same origin, analogous manners 
and language, almost identical civilization and 
warlike spirit. There could not, therefore, be 
as on the continent, a general and permanent 
abasement or* one race before the other. No- 
thing short of entire annihilation of the Saxon 
race could prevent its exerting an active and 
powerful influence upon the Norman. 

Again, the political institutions of the two, 
although not identical, were extremely analo- 
gous.* Absolute power never existed in Eng- 
land as on the continent. Oppression existed 
in fact, but was never established by law. 

The Norman and Saxon professed the same 
religion, and one, too, the Roman Catholic, that 
everywhere had the same hierarchy, the same 
orders of clergy, the same faith and forms of 
worship. There was this important difference 
Avhich led to fruitful results. On the continent 

aˆ?Guizot, 2S2 



ANGLO-SAXON INSTITUTIONS. 17 

the clergy were Romans ; in England. Saxons 
and Normans. In the former, they Avere more 
on the side of kings ; in the latter they assumed 
a place among the landed aristocracy, and in 
the nation. Their political power, in the latter, 
has always been on the decline. 

It naturally resulted from all this, that each 
people having institutions analogous to each 
other, and pressing them forward with an almost 
equal energy, their coexistence and conflict 
would serve to modify each other, and to give 
such modified result a character of greater 
strength and permanence. 

The institution which marks most strongly 
the establishment of the Norman in England, 
was the feudal system. Some traces of this 
system may be found in Saxon jurisprudence, 
but its oppressive weight never bore strongly 
upon the nations previous to the conquest. 

This system was completely established in 
Normandy. The comparatively small extent of 
the province ; the establishment there of the 
conquering Normans over the subject race which 
they subdued ; the peculiar elements of the 
Norman character ; all combined to perfect that 

15 1* 



L8 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

system, and thus give to Normandy whatever of 
benefil or injury could legitimately be derived 
from it. William, having had his birth, educa- 
tion, and experience as a ruler, all within the 
operations of this system, could not rest quietly 
until its firm establishment upon English soil. 
The circumstances, formerly adverted to. which 
favored its introduction and growth in the Ro- 
man provinces on the continent upon the con- 
quest and settlement of the barbarians, would 
apply with much greater force to the Norman 
conquest and settlement in England. The >ub- 
ject races on the continent were incapable of 
much resistance, and their uprising, under 
oppression, could be little feared. Ilence the 
feudal system was not driven to expend all its 
energies in preserving a quiet conquest. 

But the settlement of the Normans, and the 
preservation of their authority, were to be 
effected among a people as brave and warlike 
almost as themselves. Hence the early intro- 
duction, and rigorous enforcement, among the 
Saxons of England, of that system as it then 
existed in the province of Normandy. The 
result afforded a full illustration of this fact. 



ANGLO-SAXON INSTITUTIONS. 19 

On the continent, after the conquest and settle- 
ment of the barbarians, we hear very rarely or 
any insurrections of the original inhabitants. 
The wars and conflicts were between the con- 
querors themselves. But in England we find 
them between the conquerors and the conquered 
people. 

The results of the establishment of this sys- 
tem, with all its rigors in England, were two- 
fold : 

1. The little less than slavery of the labor- 
ing population. I allude to the state technically 
termed villeinage. The terms villein, serf, or 
slave, originally meant nearly the same thing, 
although, the slave always differed from the 
other two. 

Some serfs or villeins, termed villeins regard- 
ant, were annexed to certain lands, passing into 
the dominion of heirs or purchasers, whenever 
such lands changed owners. Others termed 
villeins in gross were bought and sold without 
any reference to land. The latter of these were 
never very numerous, but at the commencement 
of the thirteenth century, the former are sup- 
posed to have embraced the larger part of 



20 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

tlie laboring agricultural population of Eng- 
land.* 

The villein was subjected to the following; 
1. His service was uncertain and indeterminate, 
depending upon the master. 2. He was liable 
to Wealing, imprisonment, and every other kind 
ot chastisement. 3. He was incapable of any 
property acquisition. 4. He passed to each suc- 
cessive owner of the land, like other chattels. 
5. He might be severed from the land, and sold 
in gross by a separate deed. 0. This condition 
descended from parent to child, and thus became 
inheritable. 

But from this extreme state of degradation, 
where the Saxon ceorls and the Saxon thralls, or 
slaves, were reduced to about the same level, we 
behold a gradual emancipation effected through 
the wise, strong, humane, liberty-loving provis- 
ions of the common law of England. A few of 
its provisions only can be noticed. 

a. An illegitimate child, born in villeinage, 
being nullius filius,f and having no inheritable 
blood could not inherit the condition of villein- 
age. 

a™¦Creasy, 86. tCreasy, 89. 



ANGLO-SAXON INSTITUTIONS. 21 

h. A villein remaining unclaimed for a year 
and a day in any privileged town, was freed 
from his villeinage. 

c. The lord might at any time disfranchise 
his villein. 

</. There were many acts of the lord from 
which the law itself would infer disfranchise- 
ment whether designed or not. These embraced 
all those acts by which the lord treated the 
villein as a freeman. Such as : 1. Vesting in 
him the ownership of lands. 2. Accepting from 
him the feudal solemnity of homage. 3. By 
entering into an obligation under seal with him. 
4. By pleading with him in an ordinary action. 

The second result which the enforcement of 
this system disclosed was in the securing more 
order and regularity, and the creation of a 
stronger central power in the monarch. To this 
latter various things contributed, as : 1. The im- 
mense wealth of the crown independent of any 
contributions from its subjects. 2. The readi- 
ness with which the Saxon part of the popula- 
tion ever served the king against any of the 
rebellious Norman barons. 3. The great intel- 
lectual capacity and energy of the Norman 



22 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

kings down to the time of John. 4. A change 
made by William in the allegiance of the vassals. 
Previously to the conquest the vassal swore 
fealty absolutely to his baron.* His oath to the 
sovereign excepted his duty to his liege lord. 
As a result to this he was bound to follow the 
latter in any rebellion against the sovereign. 
The Conqueror would sutler no divided alle- 
giance. He required the oath of fealty to be 
made to himself without any reservation or ex- 
ception, and he forfeited as well the hinds of the 
sub-vassal as those of the vassal himself, if the 
tenant followed his liege lord in rebellion against 
the king. 

Thus viewing England at the commencement 
of the twelfth century, aside from some peculiar 
laws, customs and institutions of both Saxons 
and Normans, we have three great facts out of 
which to work out the problem of English con- 
stitutional freedom. These were : 1. An en- 
slaved laboring population, but along with it, 
the unceasing efforts of the common law. finally 
successful, at emancipation. 2. A strong body 
of nobles, bound together by a sense of common 

'Brougham, 1 1 1. 208. 



ANGLO-SAXON INSTITUTIONS. 23 

> 

danger, and constituting altogether a powerful 
aristocracy, o. A strong central [tower center- 
ing in the crown ; much stronger than anywhere 
else is found coexisting with feudal institutions. 
The political power, at this period, is all 
lodged with the king and the barons. There 
was then, in a political sense, no people in En- 
gland. The power exercised by the barons, was 
partly political and partly proprietary. The 
latter, however, was very much impaired by the 
new provision, just noticed, made by the Con- 
queror, as to fealty. The prospect certainly 
then was that the English government would 
settle into an unmitigated despotism. 



24 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 



CHAPTEB II. 

CHARTERS OF RIGHTS. 

We are now ready to glance at the second 
general point presented for consideration, viz.: 
the charter of rights successively wrested from 
the king by his principal barons 

It has been well remarked by Guizot that 
"liberties are nothing until they have become 
rights, positive rights, formally recognized and 
consecrated." Rights, even when recognized, 
are nothing so long as they are not entrenched 
within guaranties. And lastly, guaranties are 
nothing so long as they are not maintained by 
forces independent of them, in the limit of their 
rights. Convert liberties into rights, surround 
rights by guaranties, intrust the keeping of these 
guaranties to forces capable of maintaining 
them, such are the successive steps in the pro- 
gress towards a free government. 

''This progress was exactly realized in En- 

Guizot, History Representative Government, 302. 



CHARTERS OF RIGHTS. 25 

gland. Liberties first converted themselves into 
rights ; when rights were nearly recognized, 
guaranties were sought for them ; and lastly, 
these guaranties were placed in the hands of 
regular powers. In this way a representative 
system ot government was formed." 

No inconsiderable a portion of the right-, 
and guaranties, and even forces that maintain 
them, embraced in the British constitution, have 
been wrung reluctantly from the monarch ; have 
been wrested, sometimes, not without violence, 
from the proud prerogatives which were claimed 
to be inherited in the kingly office. This com- 
menced even with William the Conqueror. 

Although the fear of the Anglo-Saxons served 
to bind closely together the king and his Nor- 
man barons, yet the former, constituting the 
great body of the English population, and strug- 
gling to preserve their Saxon laws, could not be 
disregarded with impunity. William felt bound 
to respect these, and in 1071. gave a charter, 
giving assurance that these laws should be main- 
tained. But this was a mere recognition of a 
right without even the semblance of a guaranty 



-*'< THE BRITISH CONSTITl'TION. 

to enforce it. The consequence was, that the 
right recognized was often violated. 

A charter was granted by Henry I, contain- 
ing a solemn promise to respect all ancient 
rights. The promises were large and liberal, 
hut they were incessantly violated. 

Stephen, the successor of Henry I, granted 
two charters to his subjects ; the one confirming 
the liberties granted by Henry I. and the laws 
of Edward the Confessor; and the other prom- 
ising to reform the abuses and exactions of his 
sheriffs.* 

Even the charter of Henry II. in 1 154, ex- 
presses nothing more than a recognition of 
rights, containing no new promise, and no con- 
cession of guaranties. 

Xo concession or charter ever proved of 
much avail until we come to the reign of John, 
the period of magna cliarta. in 1215. Here, a 
number of things combined together to produce 
a result, one of the most momentous anywhere 
recorded. 

". The title of John to the crown was defect- 
ive. Arthur, the son of an elder brother, being 

aˆ?Guizot, History Representative Government, 305. 



CHARTERS <>F UK 1 1 IIS. 27 

the real heir, and who is supposed to have been 
murdered by John. 

//. The licentious acts and cruelties of John 
had rendered him an object of hatred, loathing, 
and deep aversion to the English barons. 

c. The loss of Normandy deprived English 
barons of their Norman homes, and rendered 
them more purely English. The Norman and 
Saxon hereafter are found amalgamating togeth- 
er, and instead of mutual hostility a union is 
gradually forming between them. 

</. Thei" was as vet no standing armv. the 
raising of forces still depending upon the prin- 
ciples embraced in the feudal system. 

e. Stephen de Langton, both cardinal and 
primate, was an Englishman, having English 
sympathies, and heartily united with the En- 
glish barons in their struggle with the crown. 

/. The existence of the commons, the people, 
began to be an established fact in England. The 
barons were the first to make this discovery, and 
to invoke their aid against the tyrant. Besides, 
as they demanded concessions from the king, 
thev were also willing to make like concessions 



28 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

to their own vassals, so that the feudal fetters 
bound with far less severity. 

(/. The character of John, his dissimulation, 
rashness and pusillanimity, his treachery and 
weakness, all conspired to render him just the 
very king, to all appearances, sent for the pur- 
pose of granting the great charter. 

After various negotiations and acts of hostil- 
ity between the king and barons, the parties 
finally met on the L9th June, 121."). on the plain 
of Kunnvmede. a grassy plain of about one 
hundred and sixty acres, on the south bank 
of the Thames, between Staines and Windsor. 
Here was wrested from John, magna charta, the 
great charter of English rights, devoted almost 
exclusively to the settlement of the rights, and 
confirmation of the privileges claimed by the 
laity. 

This charter seems to have been the first 
document establishing a distinction between the 
greater and lesser barons,* and the higher and 
lower clergy, leading to the fact of separation 
between the two houses of parliament. It also 
determines, with great accuracy, what had been 

*Guizot, Representative Government, 314. 



CHARTERS OF RIGHTS. 29 

obscure and ambiguous in the feudal laws, mod- 
ifying and mollifying, to a great extent, their 
operation. It fixes the amount of relief; it pro- 
vides that, with Certain trMing exceptions, no 
eseuage, or extraordinary aid. shall be imposed 
except by the national council of the kingdom, 
thus furnishing the germ of the principle that 
no tax shall be imposed without the consent of 
those who are taxed, or their representatives. 

The barons by no means limited their de- 
mands to the obtaining of privileges for them- 
selves. Almost all the immunities granted to 
them, with respect to the king, the vassals 
obtained with respect to their lords. 

Very important provisions were introduced 
regulating the administration of justice. 

By article thirty-nine, it is provided: '-'-No 
freeman shall be arrested or imprisoned, or dis- 
possessed of his tenement, or outlawed, or ex- 
iled, or in anywise proceeded against ; we will 
not place or cause to be placed, hands upon him, 
unless by the legal judgment of his peers, or by 
the law of the land." 

And by article forty: "Justice shall not be 
sold, refused or delayed to anyone." 



THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

It makes tin- king grant and assure to the 
city of London. as well :is to all the other cities, 
boroughs, towns and harbors, the possession of 
their ancient customs and liberties. 

It provides for holding the general council of 
Ihe kingdom concerning the assessment of aids, 
as follows : ,v We shall cause to he summoned 
the archbishops, bishops, abbots, earls, and the 
greater barons of the realm, singly by our 
letters. And furthermore we shall cause to be 
summoned generally by our sheriffs and bailiffs, 
all others who hold of us in chief, for a certain 
day. that is to say. forty days before their meet- 
ing at least, and to a certain place : and in all 
letters of such summons we will declare the 
cause of such summons. 

It also provides that all merchants shall have 
full and free liberty of entering England, of 
leaving it, of remaining there, and of traveling 
there by land and by water; to buy and to sell 
without being subject to any oppression accord- 
ing to the ancient and common usages. 

The foregoing embrace the principal pro- 
visions contained in the great charter. They 
are. thus far. nothing but promises, concessions 



CHARTERS OF RKSIITS. 31 

of rights. The barons, however, had now seen 
sufficient to be satisfied that, without adequate 
guaranties, there could be nothing to insure the 
performance of these promises. They accord- 
ingly provided the following as such guaranty, 
viz: the election by them of twenty-five out of 
their own number, who should be charged to 
exercise all vigilance, that the provisions of the 
charter may be carried into effect, their powers 
to be unlimited. Their duties were the follow- 
ing: In case the enactments of the charter were 
violated by the king in the smallest particular,* 
they should denounce the abuse, before the 
king, and demand that it be instantly checked. 
If the king fail to comply with this demand, 
then the barons were vested with the right, 
forty days after the issuing of the summons, to 
prosecute the king, to deprive him of his lands 
and castles until the abuse should be reformed 
to their satisfaction. 

This was undoubtedly as complete a guaranty 
as the spirit of that age required, or its compre- 
hension could understand. The great detect 
was, the want of constitutional forces to enforce 

*Guizot, Representative Government, 315, 316. 



32 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

its observance. The only forces it provided 
were a civil war, a resort to physical force. 
This w:is in harmony with the spirit of the age. 
The embodiment of political force in the consti- 
tution itself, and its quiet, peaceful production 
of effects without a resort to the calamities of 
war, had not then entered the conceptions of 
men. Bat even this forcible guaranty was of 
greal value, as it centralized the feudal aristoc- 
racy by organizing the council of barons. 

John afterwards procured the great charter to 
be annulled by the pope. Innocent III, and the 
barons excommunicated; but Archbishop Lang- 
ton refused to pronounce the sentence. John 
had scarcely got his army on foot when he was 
called away by death. 

The evil of relying upon physical force, a 
civil war. to secure the observance of guaran- 
ties, was soon perceived and strongly felt. Even 
under the reign of John's successor, Henry III, 
efforts were made for other securities than force. 
In the early part of it, a new charter was 
granted, corresponding mainly with that granted 
by John, but in it the right of resistance by 



CHARTERS OF RIGHTS. 33 

armed force, in case the king should violate his 
promises, was nol included. 

Repeated violations of the charter took place, 
and in order to obviate these the expedient was 
adopted of appointing twelve knights in each 
county, who should inquire what, according to 
ancient usages, were the rights of the king and 
the liberties of his subjects. 

Henry, on coining of age, revoked all the 
charters he had granted. This gave rise to 
great discontents, and these to new confirmations 
of charters, which were again violated. Civil 
war was now declared. Rebellion occurred, but 
its aim now was less to obtain the renewal of 
charters than to found practical guaranties of 
recognized rights. The result was a general 
renewal of the charters, granted on the 14th 
March, 1264. This was little other than a 
treaty of peace between the king and the 
barons. 

The struggle continued with unabated force 

under Edward I ; but neither party appealed to 

arms. The day of physical force had, for the 

present gone by. The contest was continued, 

C 



^4 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

hut its theatre was changed. So long as mate- 
rial forces were looked to for the enforce- 
ment of guaranties, it is clear that the higher 
triumph of political forces peacefully accomplish- 
ing their results through the constitution, can 
never take place. Both parties cannot fail in 
time to grow weary of a constant resort to 
physical force. It impoverishes and destroys 
without leaving any equivalent. The spirit it 
engenders is only one of hatred and hostility. 
its mission, therefore, is well and wisely lim- 
ited. 

Edward was a conqueror and much engaged 
in wars. The prosecution of these required 
large sums of money, to obtain which he did 
not scruple to adopt violent and arbitrary 
measures. This resulted in complaints and dis- 
satisfaction. During his absence on the con- 
tinent, his representative in England, the prince 
regent, assembled a parliament in October, 
1297. There a general confirmation of the 
charters, with several additions, was demanded, 
which the prince regent granted, and Edward 
some time after sanctioned. On his return to 
England, the barons demanded that, in his own 



CHARTERS OF RIGHTS. 35 

person, lie should confirm them. After consid- 
erable evasion, he finally granted a new confirm- 
ation, but with a restrictive clause which really 
annulled the grant. 

This raised against him a storm of public 
opinion which threatened a resort to force. 
Being severely pressed, he finally convoked a 
parliament m March, 1300, at which he con- 
firmed, without any restrictions, all the conces- 
sions he had already made, superadding to them 
new guaranties. These latter principally con- 
sisted in the provision that the charters should 
be publicly read in the county courts four times 
every year,* and that there should be elected in 
each county court, from among the knights of 
the court, three justices, sworn to receive all 
complaints of infractions of the charters, and 
to pronounce penalties against the offenders. 

So also in a parliament held in 1301, Edward 
again confirmed the charters. 

These repeated oaths of confirmation hung 
heavy upon the conscience of Edward. They 
subjected him to a restraint which he but illy 
endured. Towards the close of the year 1304. 

aˆ?Gulzot, Representative Government, 329. 



36 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

he applied to Pope Clement V, for a release 
from these oaths. By a hull, dated January .">, 
1305, the pontiff declared that all the promises 
and concessions made by Edward were abro- 
gated, null and void. 

Thi> hull he, for a long time, kept secret, 
resorting to secret manoeuvres to overthrow the 
charters. But it was now too late. Almost 
a century had elapsed since the great charter 
had been wrested from king John On the plains 
of Runnvmede. Since that time almost a con- 
stant warfare had been kept up between the 
king on the one side, and the barons and grow- 
ing power of the commons on the other. This 
had been waged on battle-fields and in parlia- 
mentary discussions. The eye of the nation 
had seen the one, and the ear of the nation 
drank in the other, until a public opinion began 
to be formed, before which, in the absence of 
large standing armies, monarchs themselves 
were becoming impotent. Hence, the confirma- 
tion by Edward in 1301, was the last confirmation 
ever made. The right which it proclaimed 
was definitely recognized. From that period the 
charters, notwithstanding all attacks made upon 



CHARTERS OF RIGHTS. ?u 

them have remained as the immovable basis of 
public right in England." 

We now close the consideration of that part 
of the British constitution derived from charters. 
The rights thus acquired have not come up from 
the people, and been by them maintained, but 
they have conic down from the throne, through 
the agency,) of (he barons. They have been 
wrested by force, physical and moral, from that 
which at one period, concentrated all political 
power, the crown. England owes much, if 
not all, her constitutional freedom and power 
to the stern integrity, inflexible purposes, 
and steady onward progress of her baronial 
aristocracy. And we shall presently find that 
the same power so efficient in wresting rights 
under the form of concessions from the crown, 
constitutes, in the working of the constitution, 
that element of conservatism, strength and 
stability, that affords the promise of perpetual 
endurance. 

*Gulzot, Representative Government, 330. 



233592 



3S THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 



CHAPTER III. 

ORIGIN AND GROWTH OF THE ENGLISH PARLIA- 
MENT. 

We now proceed to the third branch of in- 
quiry relating to England's constitutional history, 
viz: the origin and growth of the English par- 
liament, including the successive steps or stages 
by which the two houses attained their political 
power, and the principle of representation 
became firmly established. 

This assumes directly the contrary position 
from that just considered. That assumed that 
all political power centered in the crown, and 
that all rights were nothing more than con- 
cessions from prerogative?. This, that the peo- 
ple were the great source of power, and that all 
authority legitimately came from them. The 
first brings power from above; the second sum- 
mons it from below. The point at which they 
meet is the central, focal one. around which 



THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. 39 

revolves the forces that together compose the 
British constitution. 

It is essential here to understand the different 
functions of that general power which governs 
society. 

First, we have the legislative, which imposes 
rules and laws upon the mass of society, and 
even upon the executive power. It is in its 
legislative capacity that the sovereignty of the 
state receives its highest development.* 

But the law-making power can be of little 
effect without that necessary accompaniment, 
the law-executing power. Next, therefore, 
appears the executive, and this takes the daily 
oversight of the general business of society, 
war, peace, revenue, general execution of the 
laws. 

But this law-executing power must be guided 
aright in its action. Hence the necessity of the 
judicial, which ascertains the law, defines it, 
puts upon it a construction, applies it to the 
many purposes of business and life, and adjusts 
all matters of private interest between individ- 
uals and the state and its citizens. 

aˆ?Guizot, Representative Government, 288. 



4(1 THE BRITISH (ONSTITI IloN. 

In addition to these is the administrative 
power, which is charged under its own responsi- 
bility, with the duty of regulating matters 
which cannot be anticipated and provided tor by 
any general laws. 

The centralization of these four powers, and 
their union in one man creates a despotism. 
Their separation, and distribution in such a 
manner as that they shall severally operate as 
mutual restraints and cheeks upon each other, 
creates a free government. It is in their union 
and their separate action that we find most of 
the distinctive differences between the monarchi- 
cal governments of the continent, and the mixed, 
tree government of great Britain. 

On the continent centralization has destroyed 
all localization, absorbed all local powers, and 
resulted in a more or less strongly unqualified 
absolutism. 

In England, fortunately, local powers have 
never been destroyed. They have been pre- 
served through a thousand vicissitudes. They 
have been harmoniously developed, have regu- 
lated and defined their own action. The 1 central 
government, as we now behold it, has been a 



THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. 41 

gradual emanation from them. Its formation 
lias had a commencement, a progress, a history, 
all replete with interest and instruction. 

The Saxons, as we have seen, had their witen- 
agemote, or couneil of wise men. who were 
advisers of the king. The first Norman kings 
had their council of barons, an assembly of 
nobles who treated of affairs of stale or assisted 
the king in the adminstration of justice. The 
legislative and judicial powers were united, and 
belonged to this assembly. The ancient usage 
was that the nobles should meet at Christmas 
either for a celebration or deliberation concern- 
ing the affairs of the kingdom. They were 
occupied in legislation, ecclesiastical affair-, 
questions of peace and war, imposition of taxes, 
or other matters of government. 

As to the constitution of these assemblies it 
was undoubtedly feudal, and composed of the 
king's vassals, who owed him service both at 
court and in war. But these could not all have 
attended, as the vassals of William I exceeded 
six hundred in number. There is here no trace 
of election or representation. Under the first 
Norman kings two forces composed the govern- 



A?2 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

iiit'iit: royalty and the council of barons. The 
history of England's chartered rights reveals 
the Btruggle between these two forces. It was 
during the continuance of this struggle that the 
commons commenced rising into importance. 
The fact that, more than any other, proves the 
rise of the commons, is the introduction of 
county deputies into parliament. 

The first clear trace of this is in 1214, in the 
assembly convoked by John at Oxford. Some 
writs then issued, ordered that the followers of the 
barons should present themselves at Oxford with- 
out arms," and enjoined besides that the sheriffs 
should send to Oxford four approved knights from 
each county "in order to consider, with as, the 
affairs of our kingdom." Here, for the first time, 
is representation, that is, the admission of certain 
individuals, who should appear and act in the 
name of all. The object undoubtedly was to 
attach the knights to the royal interest in the 
contest with the barons. The same struggle and 
policy ran through the reign of Henry III. 

Forty years later, in 1251, in convoking an 
extraordinary parliament in London, Henry III 

*Guizot, History Representative Government, 358. 



THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. 43 

addressed a writ to the sheriffs enjoining: them 
to cause two knights to be eleeted in the county 
coints 'aˆ? in the stead of each and all of* then!,"* 
to deliberate on the aid to be granted to the 
king. Here is real representation. It is the 
entrance of the commons into parliament in the 
persons of the two knights who represent 
them. 

Ten years later still, in 12<>4, a parliament 
was convoked to consist of peers, county depu- 
ties, aiid also borough deputies, thus giving it 
the extent it has since preserved. 

The difference between county and town or 
borough deputies was. that the former came in 
right of being the immediate vassals of the 
king, while the latter came not upon any prin- 
ciple of right, but depended entirely upon 
isolated facts bearing no relation to one another. 
No general principle was invoked applying to 
all towns and boroughs. The grant of repre- 
sentatives to one did not involve any similar 
concession to another, f or others. Here, thus 
early, we discern the radical vice in the electoral 
system of England, which gave rise to the rot- 

aˆ?Guizot, History Representative Government, 366. fldem, 355. 



44 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

ten borough system, so much complained of un- 
til the passage of the reform bill in 1821. It 
arose from the privilege first conferred upon 
boroughs or towns, which finally ripened into 
rights. The borough changed sometimes, al- 
most totally disappeared in the progress of time. 
But the right to send representatives still re- 
mained, and hence, in some eases, where the 
entire borough was owned by one individual, 
he alone was entitled to send the representative. 
At the same time other places had grown up 
into importance where no such right existed. 
Thus the representation of boroughs grew to 
l>e, in the extremes! degree, unequal. 

The regular parliaments embodying the 
principle of representation, having found their 
origin in the troublous times of John and 
Henry II. became more thoroughly formed and 
consolidated during the reign of Edward I. 

Two kinds of parliament appear during this 
reign ; the one composed only of the higher 
barons, the other of deputies from counties and 
boroughs. The attributes of these wire almost 
identical, the same powers being often exercised 
by each. The first mentioned met much more 



THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. 45 

frequently, the hist only upon extraordinary 
occasions, when some general impost was to be 
obtained from the freeholders. 

In 1295, a complete parliament was convoke* I 
at Westminster, the writs being addressed to 
the bishops and archbishops, ordering them to 
cause a certain number of deputies for the chap- 
ters and for the clergy to be nominated." also 
summoning forty-nine earls or barons individ- 
ually, and also enjoining the sheriffs to cause 
two knights to be elected for each county, ami 
two deputies for each borough in the county. 

This parliament, at its meeting, was divided 
into two houses, one containing lay representa- 
tives, the other ecclesiastical ; their place of 
meeting and votes being distinct. 

In the beginning of the fourteenth century 
the parliament already rested on a fixed basis. 
It was composed 

a. Of earls or lay barons which the king 
convened individually. Along with these were 
the principal functionaries of the king, such as 
the judges and members of the privy council. 

h. Of archbishops, bishops, abbots, and pri- 

*Gulzot, Representative Government, ?<Tl. 



4i> THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

ors, also summoned individually.* In regard 
to both these, and the earls or barons, no law or 
precedent defined who should be summoned. 
The king acted arbitrarily in this respect, sum- 
moning whoever he pleased. It had no* vet 
settled into an hereditary right. 

r. Of deputies, from the knights or freehold- 
ers of the counties. Here we meet with repre- 
sentation. The convocation of these deputies 
was more certain as it resulted from the right 
of every immediate vassal to a seat in the 
general assembly ; and regular, because the 
county courts, whence they originated, were. 
all over England, composed of the same ele- 
ments, and possessed of the same interests, con- 
stituting a uniform and identical whole, each br- 
ing equally entitled to the privilege of repre- 
sentation. 

d. Of deputies from cities, towns and bor- 
oughs. There was here no certainty or regular- 
ity. The admission of deputies from one city 
or town did not involve their admission from 
another, or even from the same at a future time. 
The number of town and borough deputies was 

* Guizot. History of Representative Government, 374. 



THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. 47 

not fixed, but determined arbitrarily by the 
king. But the convocation of two for each 
county, and as many for each borough, finally 
passed into a rule. Neither the convocation of 
county nor borough deputies was originally a 
public necessity, but it became such when con- 
sent in all matters of impost was recognized as 
a right. 

Who were the electors in the counties and 
boroughs, and what was the manner of election? 
In regard to the former, two facts present them- 
selves.* 

a. The direct vassals of the king who, on 
account of their inferior importance, ceased to 
attend the general assembly ; naturally made it 
their business to attend the county courts. 

b. The great body of freeholders also attend- 
ed the same courts, and the one became merged 
in the other, both exercising the same rights. 
This general assembly of freeholders, having 
local as well as general matters to attend to, fell 
into the habit of appointing some one or more 
of its members, to attend to their local or 
general business. 

* Guizot, Representative Government, 379. 



1:8 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

The boroughs have a different history. It 
was not there the freeholder but the citizen, 
who controlled its operations. It was the citi- 
zens who managed the affairs of the borough in 
virtue of their charter, upon whom devolved the 
righl of naming its representatives. 

The electoral rights, were therefore, entirely 
different in the counties and boroughs. In the 
former being regular they have adapted them- 
selves to all the vicissitudes of property, and 
have become proportionally extended, while in 
the boroughs, until the late parliamentary re- 
form, they have remained unaltered. The 
mode of election was by open voting, which 
became perpetuated. 

The true principle of representation in re- 
lation to counties and boroughs was originally 
carried into parliament.* The representatives 
of each entering there remained distinct. Those 
of the boroughs never deliberated with those of 
the counties: each treated with the government 
as to those affairs alone which interested itself , 
consenting on its own account to the imposition 
of taxes on its own constituency. 

aˆ?Guizot. Representative GoverWmetit, 393, 



THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. 4i> 

In process of time, however, this became 
changed, the county and borough members he- 
coining united into one single assembly."" To- 
wards the middle of the fourteenth century the 
parliament was divided into two houses, one 
the house of lords, in which the great barons 
were individually summoned ; the other that of 
the commons, comprising all the elected repre- 
sentatives of counties and boroughs. 

This was an important result, and one that 
has fixed the destiny of England. Had the rep- 
resentatives of the counties and boroughs con- 
tinued to remain separate in their meeting, in 
their interests, and in their action, the power of 
the commons would have been divided, and 
thus necessarily weakened, and by creating 
divisions between the two, the king, in con- 
junction with the lords, might easily have over- 
come them. But the representatives of the 
counties and boroughs having the same origin , 
appearing in parliament by virtue of the same 
title, election ; each alike in having in charge 
certain local interests, which were often identi- 
cal ;f by forming with each other a union so inti- 

*Guizot, Representative Government, 419. tldem, 422. 

D 3 



50 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

mate as to form constituent parts of the same 
assembly, acquired for themselves such com- 
bined and concentrated power as to render 
them a co-ordinate branch of the English govern- 
ment, and vest in them the political supremacy 
which their real importance demanded. Thus, 
while the great barons, composing the house 
of lords, constituted the chief council of the 
king, and engaged in public affairs in a perma- 
nent manner by reason of their personal im- 
portance, the representatives of the counties 
and boroughs, clothed with a power not per- 
sonal but representative, interfering in public 
affairs onl} r from time to time and in certain 
particular cases, were enabled by their combi- 
nation and united action, to exert an influence, 
little less than controlling, in the administration 
of the government. 

The great lever through which the commons 
rose into power, and ultimately compelled that 
power to be recognized by the crown, Avas in 
the grant of supplies. When once the point 
was conceded, that the only road to the pockets 
of the people lay through the house of commons; 
that their vote alone could replenish an exhaust- 



THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. 51 

ed treasury ', they acquired a constitutional im- 
portance which cannot well be overestimated. 
This right, although early conceded, yet they 
were long in fully acquiring. But in the early 
part of the fourteenth century we find them 
possessed of so much strength in the exercise of 
it as to venture upon the annexation of condi- 
tions. In 1309 when granting to Edward II a 
twentieth part of their movable goods, they ex- 
pressly attached the condition that "the king 
should take into consideration, and should 
grant them the redress of certain grievances of 
which they had to complain/'' 

In 1322 a statute Avas passed declaring that 
" thenceforward all laws respecting the estate 
of the crown, or of the realm and people, must 
be treated, accorded and established in parlia- 
ment by the king,* by and Avith the assent of 
the prelates, earls, barons, commonalty of the 
realm." This amounts, thus early, to a clear 
recognition of the commonalty as a co-ordinate 
branch of the government, and of its right to 
interfere in legislation, and all great public 
affairs. 

'Gutzot, Representative Government, 461. 



52 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

In perfect accordance with the principle thus 
early embraced in this statute, we find the 
action of the government. In 1328, a treaty of 
peace was made with Scotland, which was con- 
cluded with the consent of the parliament."" In 
1331, Edward III consulted the parliament on 
the question of peace or war with France. In 
1336, it urged the king to declare war against 
Scotland. In 1341, the parliament pressed Ed- 
ward III to continue the war in France, and 
furnished him with large subsidies. In 134:!. 
the parliament was convoked to examine and 
advise what had best be done in the existing 
state of affairs. In 1361, peace with France 
having been concluded, the parliament was con- 
voked, and the treaty was submitted to its in- 
spection, and received its approval. In 1368, 
the negotiations with Scotland were submitted 
to the consideration of the parliament. In 
1369, the king consulted the parliament as to 
whether he should recommence the war with 
France, because of the non-observance of the 
conditions of the last treaty; and the parlia- 
ment advised him to do so, and voted subsidies. 

aˆ?Creasy, 218, 219. 



THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. 53 

These facts are all valuable as showing the 
constant practice of intervention by the com- 
mons in important national affairs at this early 
period, and during the strong reign of Edward 
III. 

Another fact which it becomes important 
here to notice is the right of petition, its 
essence, origin and history. Its essence is a 
right to demand the reparation of an injury, or 
to express a desire. In the fourteenth century 
all petitions were addressed to the king. He 
governed, and possessed both the right and the 
power to redress grievances. But he governed 
in his council, the most eminent and extensive 
of which was the parliament. The regular 
practice was, that the king, by officers specially 
appointed for that purpose, received and ex- 
amined all petitions, and afterwards called the 
attention of both houses to those with whose 
prayers he could not comply without their sanc- 
tion. The interference of the houses of parlia- 
ment was, therefore, only in certain cases, and 
then as a necessary council. All propositions 
in either house took the form of petitions to the 
king for his order, assent, or edict, which thus 



. r >4- THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

had the force of law; and at the close of each 
session, the clerks in chancery reduced the 
whole to a form of statutes. Thus, in its origin, 
the houses of parliament, and more especially 
that of the commons, were themselves the great 
public petitioner. 

When the house of commons had achieved 
the position of a co-ordinate branch of the gov- 
ernment, and acquired the possession of power 
as such, the right of petition to the two houses 
of parliament became regarded as a natural con- 
sequence of the right of petition to the king. 

The importance of this consists principally 
in the creation of new avenues to the introduc- 
tion of business. Formerly the government 
brought forward the questions which gave rise 
to the discussions in the two houses. Now the 
right of petition introduces a new initiative, and 
the humblest citizen, who forms no part of the 
public power, can, nevertheless, through the ex- 
ercise of that right, introduce a subject of dis- 
cussion, and thus set that power in motion. 

It was during the lon<r half century reign of 
Edward III that the parliament acquired much 
of its present constitution. We have already 



THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. 55 

seen the numerous instances of its intervention 
in the affairs of government. Another fact 
characterizing this reign is the great regularity 
with which the parliament was convoked. Dur- 
ing his reign there were forty-eight sessions, 
nearly one session in each year. It passed acts 
providing for the regularity of its own convo- 
cation, and also to insure the security of its de- 
liberations. 

Again, it is during this reign that we hear 
for the first time of the parliament being di- 
vided into two houses ;* and quite at the end of 
the same reign, in 1377, the parliamentary rolls 
first make mention of the speaker of the house 
of commons. 

Another important fact to be noticed during 
this reign is the voting of taxes. Many in- 
stances occur of the imposition of arbitrary and 
illegal imposts, but the perseverance of the 
commons in the maintenance of their exclusive 
right of taxation was steady and continuous. 
They, in two cases, even extended it beyond the 
concession of subsidies. In 1340, the parlia- 
ment appointed certain persons to receive the 

*Guizot, Representative Government, 478. 



56 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

accounts of the tax-collectors, and required 
them to give security for the payment of all 
they received. This is interesting as containing 
the germ of a right subsequently asserted and 
maintained, of demanding an account of the 
national expenditures. The first step in that 
direction was taken by making sure of the fideli- 
ty of the receipts. In 1354. the parliament, in 
granting a tax on wool, annexed to it a condi- 
tion that the money so raised should be devoted 
to the war then carried on. This presents us 
with the rudiment of another parliamentary 
right, that of the appropriation of the public 
funds. The parliament appear during this 
reign to have participated generally in legisla- 
tion. This is evident from the form of the 
statutes passed. 

Besides taking an active part in things re- 
lating to wars and foreign affairs, the interfer- 
ence of parliament in the internal administration 
of the country was no less strongly marked. 
In 1342, the commons, profiting by an exhaust- 
ed treasury, presented to the king two petitions. 

" That certain by commission may hear the 
account of those who have received wools, 



THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. 57 

moneys, or other aid for the king, and that the 
same may be enrolled in the chancery." This, 
with some slight modification, was granted. 

*' That the chancellor and other officers of 
state may be chosen in open parliament, and at 
the same time be openly sworn to observe the 
laws of the land and magna charta." This also 
was granted with some modification. These, 
with their modifications, were immediately con- 
verted into statutes. Here again we find the 
rudiments of ministerial responsibility to parlia- 
ment ; the claim to exercise some influence over 
the choice of ministers, and also to hold them 
responsible for their conduct, 

Thus the long reign of Edward III saw the 
English parliament established on a permanent 
basis. It has undergone but little real alteration 
since, only its functions have become better 
defined. 

The power of the commons also increased 
under Richard II, so that at the accession of 
Henry IV, it might be said of the three follow- 
ing points, that the first was decided in their 
favor ; the second admitted in principle, and the 



58 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

third confirmed by frequent exercise. These 
were : 

a. That they alone could grant taxes. 

h. That all laws enacted must be with their 
consent. 

C. That the administration of government 
was subject to their inspection and control. 

During: the domination of the house of Lan- 
caster, the parliament also made some progress. 
The want of a clear title in the princes of that 
house probably exerted an influence on the ex- 
tent of their prerogative claims. The parlia- 
ment exercised with much opposition : * 

a. The voting of taxes. 

b. The appropriation of the subsidies. 

c. The investigation of the public accounts. 

d. Intervention in the legislature. 

e. Impeachment of the great officers of the 
crown. 

Two additional rights were also claimed, and 
quite a progress made towards their complete 
recognition under the Lancastrian princes. 
These were : 

a. Liberty of speech to the members. 

*Guizot, Representative Government, 510. 



THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. 59 

h. The inviolability of the members, their 
freedom from arrest. 

In 1407, in a debate as to which house should 
have the exclusive right to introduce bills for 
the raising of taxes, it was finalty settled : * 

a. That such right should belong exclusively 
to the commons. 

h. That it was the right of both houses that 
the king should take no cognizance of the sub- 
ject of their deliberations until they had come to 
a decision upon it, and could lay it before him as 
the desire of the lords and commons in parlia- 
ment assembled. 

It was at this epoch that the lodgment of the 
ultimate judicial power was settled. That power 
originally resided in the entire parliament. At 
the suggestion of the commons in 1399, it was 
declared to belong exclusively to the house of 
lords. 

During the reign of Henry VI, an act was 
passed limiting the right of franchise, f and 
enacting that for the future, knights of the shire 
shall be chosen by people dwelling and resident 
in the counties, whereof every one of them shall 

*Guizot, Representative Government, 514. tCreasy, 231. 



60 THE BBITISH CONSTITUTION. 

have free land or tenement to the value of forty 
shillings, by the year at least, above all charges. 
Two years later was passed an act requiring the 
voter's freehold to be situate in the county for 
which he votes, and these contain essentially the 
basis for voting which has ever since been acted 
upon. During this long reign of Henry VI the 
power of parliament advanced, and almost ab- 
sorbed the entire government. 

During the century that occurred between 
Richard II and Richard III. there was a great 
diminution of England's feudal aristocracy. 
This was the era of sanguinary wars between 
the partisans of the houses of York and Lancas- 
ter ; between the white and red roses. Many of 
the great barons of England fell on the battle- 
field, and others were stripped of a great part 
or the whole, of their resources. Thus that 
sturdy baronial power that wrested magna 
charta from king John, no longer existed. It 
was broken down, and royalty had little to fear 
of opposition from that quarter. 

The commons, it is true, had acquired many 
constitutional rights and privileges of great 
value. But thev also had been wasted by civil 



THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. (>1 

war; and besides, as against (lie crown, they 
were accustomed to follow the lead of the 
barons, and were not, therefore, in a condition 
to take their place in a struggle with royalty. 

These were the circumstances under which 
the house of Tudor, in the person of Henry VII, 
acquired the crown of 1485. With an aristoc- 
racy so depressed, and well near annihilated, 
and with commons unaccustomed to take the 
lead in contests with the crown, and also 
laboring under great depression, we may nat- 
urally expect to see royalty again in the ascend- 
ant. We are not disappointed. The Tudors 
reigned with more absolute authority than their 
predecessors. Their better title to the crown, 
together with the circumstances just alluded to, 
enabled them to do this. 

We find, therefore, Henry VIII, the success- 
or of Henry VII, performing many acts which 
mark the worst of tyrants, and during his reign 
some parliamentary acts were passed of a gen- 
eral character which appear to be wide devia- 
tions from any previous action. Of these we 
have : 

a. An act passed in 1529. releasing the king 



62 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

from all debts he had contracted six years be- 
fore, although his securities had in many cases 
passed into the hands of third persons who had 
purchased them for valuable considerations.* 

1). That empowering the king, on attaining 
the age of twenty-four years, to repeal all acts of 
parliament made while he was under that age. 

c. That declaring the proclamations of the 
king in council, if made under pain of fine and 
imprisonment, to have the force of statutes, pro- 
vided they affected no one's property or life, and 
violated no existing law. and authorizing the 
king by proclamation to make any opinion 
heretical, and annexing death as the penalty of 
holding them. 

These were each one, acts which disgraced 
the English parliament, and indicated the dispo- 
sition to lay the liberties of the English nation 
at the foot of the throne. And what was worse, 
the oppression of the Tudors. although it was in 
fact less severe than that of many of the Plan- 
tagenets, was nevertheless exercised upon sys- 
tem. Under them, royalty laid claim to a 
primitive independent sovereignty. The powers 

'Brougham, in, 254. 



THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. 63 

of the prerogative were asserted as matter of 
right to have a legal supremacy. Under its 
fearful shadow, royalty declared itself absolute 
and superior to all laws. 

What this might have led to a century earlier 
it might be difficult to say, but the sixteenth 
century broke upon England and Europe with a 
new light. The spirit of industry was abroad. 
It penetrated every department. Agriculture, 
the mechanic arts, manufactures, commerce, with 
all their stirring activities, pervaded the hearts 
of men. To carry all these out required the ex- 
ercise of bold, daring and free minds. The 
habits of the age, therefore, were all in direct 
hostility to the exorbitant claims of preroga- 
tive. 

The result of this industrial activity was to 
accumulate wealth. Property lost its fixedness. 
It really changed hands, even baronial property 
could not stand against the spirit of the age. 
Landed property became divided, and between 
division and transfer the old feudal nobility 
wasted away. Persons who had acquired prop- 
erty by trade began to rise to distinction. At 
the beginning of the seventeenth century the 



<'4 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

high nobility, composing the house of lords, did 
nol equal in wealth the house of commons.* 

There was something more than this new 
spirit and change of property, accompanied by 
change of circumstances. There was inaugurat- 
ed a new march of mind. The mind claimed its 
prerogative as well as the king. Thought was 
free, hold and searching in its character. The 
principles of the Puritans were taking root ii 
the soil of England. Political liberty could not 
long be divorced from those who were willing to 
sacrifice all for liberty of conscience. 

Again, we are to consider that under the 
reign of the Tudors there were numerous con- 
cessions to the importance of parliament. This 
body under the Plantagenets had been a means 
of resistance, a guaranty of private rights, but 
under the Tudors it was an instrument of gov. 
eminent, of general policy. While, therefore, 
as in the very acts we have cited, it was the tool 
of royalty, yet even by that means its impor- 
tance became greatly increased. 

The reign of the Tudors lasted a little over 
a century, and ended with that of Elizabeth, 

'Guizot, 303. 



THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. 65 

about the close of the sixteenth century. At 
this period the free institutions of England may 
be said to consist : 

a . Of maxims, principles of liberty, acknowl- 
edged in written documents.* 

h. Of precedents, examples of liberty, which 
were scattered over their previous history. 

c. Of particular local institutions, such as 
trial by jury, right of holding public meetings, 
of bearing arms, etc. 

d. Of the parliament, now more necessary to 
the kings than ever, as their independent reve- 
nues, crown domains, and feudal rights, having 
disappeared, they had become dependent on 
their parliaments for their household expenses. 

The house of Stuart succeeded to the crown 
in the person of James I, about the commence- 
ment of the seventeenth century. And then 
began the real contest between the crown and 
the parliament, which ended in the triumph of 
the latter. The mutterings of the tempest were 
heard during the reign of James, but it was 
rather a discussion of principles. He claimed 
absolute power as a birthright. His conduct 

aˆ?Giiizot, 305. 

E 3* 



fif> mi: BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

was tickle weak and wavering, while the com- 
mons were firm and steady. 

Hut under the second Stuart, Charles I, came 
the decisive conflict between the commons and 
the king, between tree inquiry and pure mon- 
archy. In the progress of the revolution three 
parties were very clearly developed. These 
were : - 

a. The pure monarchy party, whose princi- 
ples were entirely monarchical, but who advo- 
cated legal reform. 

h. The political revolutionary party, who 
deemed the ancient guaranties insufficient, and 
sought to place the preponderence of power in 
the house of commons. 

c. The republican party, who went for a rad- 
ical change in the government, who sought to 
overthrow the old forms, and establish new 
ones ; who wished to extend the power of the 
two houses, particularly of the commons, by 
ofivinsj to it the nomination of the ^reat officers 
of state, and the supreme direction of affairs in 
general. Of these three, as is usual in revolu- 
tions, the last, which- was the most radical, and 

X.ilizot. 30S-9. 



THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. 67 

animated with the most enthusiasm, was in the 
end triumphant. 

The first act of warfare on the part of 
Charles was the imprisonment of members of 
parliament for words spoken in debate.* But 
tlnA» house compelled him to release them by re- 
fusing to proceed to business until their release. 
Next he dissolved the parliament, but this only 
led to the election of another still more hostile. 
Another dissolution led to a third parliament, 
and it was from this that the famous petition of 
right proceeded, which constitutes one of the 
pillars upon which reposes the English constitu- 
tion. By this, the parliament compelled the 
king to declare illegal the requisition of loans 
without parliamentary sanction, or the billeting 
of soldiers upon subjects, or commitment with- 
out legal process, or procedure by martial law. 
But when, in addition, they required him to 
give up the right of levying tonnage and pound- 
age, he again dissolved the parliament and im- 
prisoned the opposition leaders. 

But to reign without a parliament was impos- 
sible, and another was summoned. This turned 

*Brougham, in, 273. 



68 THK BRITISH CONSTITUTION 

out 1o be what is termed the long parliament, 

which survived the king. This parliament 
passed a l>ill to secure the calling of parliaments 
every three years; prohibited their dissolution 
by the king until after a session of fifty days; 
declared illegal all levies of customs and imposts 
without consent of parliament ; and forever 
abolished the star chamber and high commission 
courts, depriving the privy council of all juris- 
diction in criminal matters. They also passed 
an act to prevent a dissolution without their own 
consent, which, of itself, changed the entire 
constitution. 

This parliament continued its session for 
eighteen years. Under its rule, war was waged 
against the king, who was ultimately taken, 
tried and executed. It abolished royalty, de- 
clared it treason to give any one the title of king 
without act of parliament, set aside the house of 
lords, thus leaving the whole power, legislative 
and executive, vested in the commons. 

This parliament was succeeded by one of 
Oliver Cromwell's selection, called Barebone's 
parliament, which, showing some disposition to- 
wards independence in the exercise of its pow- 



THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. 69 

ers, was dissolved, and the protectorate pro- 
claimed. The government was now little other 
than a military despotism. The real power all 
centered in the protector, Oliver Cromwell. He 
well knew the necessity of governing by a par- 
liament, and endeavored to do so, but failed to 
get together one that would long satisfy his 
wishes. He had recourse, for this purpose, to 
all the various parties. He tried the religious 
enthusiasts, the republican, the presbyterians, 
and the officers of the army. He got together 
and dissolved four parliaments, each one having 
endeavored to wrest from him the authority 
which he exercised, and to rule in its turn. 

He finally reigned alone, the government he 
inaugurated being little other than a military 
despotism. But every measure of his was con- 
ceived in wisdom, prosecuted with energy, and 
crowned with success. His rule, although des- 
potic, was one of the most important in the En- 
glish annals. 

On the death of Cromwell, his colossal pow- 
er, the exercise of which had depended upon his 
own personal energy, disappeared at once, and 
thereupon, in 1660, the nation welcomed back 



7" THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

the house of Stuart, in the person of Charles II, 
the brother of Charles I. The revolution had 
taught at least three truths : 

a. That the king could never again separate 
himself from the parliament. That the two 
must reign together, neither one being com- 
petent to reign alone. 

b. That the house of commons was the 
stronger branch of the parliament. 

c. That Protestantism had achieved a com- 
plete and definite ascendancy in England. 

Some important acts date their origin from 
the reign of Charles II. Two of these are 
worthy of note. The first was to prevent the 
legislature being overawed, and their votes 
coerced by riotous and seditious mobs, under 
the guise of petitioners. 

The second was the celebrated habeas corpus 
act, which prescribed a remedy, prompt and 
efficacious, in all cases of arbitrary imprison- 
ment, without process of law. It brought im- 
mediately before the judge, the prisoner, with 
the cause, if any. of his detention, and in case 
the imprisonment was illegal, discharged him. 

But the reign of Charles presents a great 



THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. 71 

contrast with that of Cromwell. He began with 
Lord Clarendon as prime minister, who repre- 
sented the pure monarchy party. Next we have 
what was termed the cabal ministry, formed of 
profligates and libertines,* whose government, 
although evincing practical skill in its manage- 
ment, and considerable intelligence and liberal- 
ity, was, nevertheless, profoundly selfish and 
immoral. The nation rebelled against this gov- 
ernment of profligates. 

A new ministry was formed, a national one ; 
but that, with a corrupt king and court, could 
not gain possession of the moral force of the 
country. Charles, now having tired all parties, 
commenced a career of absolute power. But in 
the midst of it he was called away, and the 
crown descended upon the third Stuart brother, 
James II. 

James, witli his court-party, his power of 
patronage, his supple judges, and his subserv- 
ient crown lawyers, succeeded in tearing away 
many of the barriers of the constitution, and in 
so extending the prerogative, as to create an ab- 
solute monarchy. And yet, while seemingly 

aˆ?Guizot. 316. ".IT. :iis. 



72 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

having every political power at his disposal, the 
short period of a single week was sufficient to 
make him a throneless, crownless wanderer. 
This extraordinary result was, in great part, due 
to foreign politics. 

The two great powers that were then divid- 
ing Europe between them in their conflicts were 
Louis XIV, and William, Prince of Orange. 
The former represented the Catholic and mo- 
narchical principles, the latter the Protestant and 
liberal. England, through her two kings, Charles 
II and James II, had been, for the most part, 
unknown to herself, subserving the interests of 
Louis XIV. William was the nephew, and had 
married Mary the daughter of James I. He 
was both a statesman and a soldier. The En- 
glish nation sympathized with him and his large, 
free, protectant principle-. The revolution of 
1688, occurred, which, almost without blood- 
shed, placed William and Mary upon the En- 
glish throne. 

A new parliament was assembled, which 
declared that King James had abdicated, and 
that the throne was vacant. Then followed the 
act of settlement by which, th^tlirone being 



THE ENGLISH PAULIAMENT. 73 

declared vacant, and James and his children Ik- 
inA» set aside, the succession to the crown was 
settled: 1. Upon William and Man. 2. Upon 
their death without descendants upon Anne, also 
a daughter of James I, and by a subsequent act. 
3. Upon her death without descendants, then it 
was limited to the descendants of James Fs 
daughter, Sophia, who had married the Elector 
Palatine of Hanover. 

This was, in every aspect of the case, a revo- 
lution. It changed the entire order of succession. 
James had never abdicated. Expulsion is not 
abdication. Then his descendants were set aside. 
It presents a clear example of a whole people, 
the commons taking the lead, rising against the 
head of the government, or at least a co-ordinate 
branch of it, expelling that head or branch and 
changing the entire order of succession, and that 
order of succession has ever since been followed. 
William and Mary, and Anne, successively died 
without leaving any descendants. Then came 
in the house of Brunswick, in the person of 
George I, the grandson of James I, and son of 
the Elector Palatine. Ever since 1089 the king 
of England has only been such by virtue of this 

4 



74 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

ad of settlement. However other kings may 
claim to reign by divine right, the king of En- 
gland clearly can not. He reigns by virtue of an 
act of parliament. It is important to notice that 
tin' power of the people is the real source from 
which England's king can claim the exercise of 
any authority. Any other conclusion would 
render the English government a government 
de facto, and not de jure, for the last one hun- 
dred and ninety years. 

Along with the act of settlement, and consti- 
tuting a part of it, w r as also a bill of rights, 
which reasserted in clear, strong terms, all those 
great cardinal truths and principles in govern- 
ments which the commons and generally the 
peers also, had been contending for ever since 
the grant of the great charter. Among these 
were the declaration that there existed no power, 
Avithout consent of parliament, to suspend or 
dispense with laws or their execution ; or to levy 
money for or to the use of the crown by pre- 
tence and prerogative. That the right of peti- 
tion should be enjoyed unimpaired. That with- 
out consent of parliament, no standing army 
should be raised or kept in the kingdom in time 



THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. 75 

of peace. That Protestant subjects may have 
arms for their defense. That elections of mem- 
bers of parliament shall be free. That freedom 
of speech and debate shall not be impeached or 
questioned out of parliament. That excessive 
bail shall not be required, or excessive fines im- 
posed, or cruel or unusual punishment inflicted. 
That jurors may be duly impaneled and returned, 
and those passing upon high treason be free- 
holders, and that for redress of grievances, par- 
liaments be held frequently. 

The provision in regard to a standing army 
has rendered it necessary to pass acts annually 
since that time, authorizing the keeping on foot 
a defined number of troops,* and giving the 
crown the power of exercising martial law over 
them. So, also, in regard to the revenue, since 
the reign of William and Mary, the practice of 
the commons has been, not to vote the crown 
certain large sums of revenue, to be subject to 
its application, but to appropriate specific parts 
of the revenue to specific purposes of govern- 
ment. 

The revolution of 1688 closes the long line of 

*Creasy. 298. 



76 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

contests between king and parliament. For 
about seven hundred years those contests had 
been going on. As a general fact, both the com- 
mons and the nobility had been found fighting 
together the great battles of constitutional free- 
dom. As another general fact, although meet- 
ing with occasional reverses, they had always 
been ultimately successful. Always temperate 
in their claims, wise in their means, steady and 
energetic in their course of action, they had 
always proved faithful to the great trusts con- 
tided to them ; and as the last crowning evidence 
of their triumph, had bestowed the English 
crown upon two of their own selection, pre- 
scribed the direction it should take, and annexed 
the proper limitations to the exercise of its 
power. Since that period, the English constitu- 
tion has moved on uninterruptedly, its workings 
eliciting the admiration of all thinking men 
wherever they might be found. The reform bill 
of 1832 was called tor by the great changes 
which time had wrought in the borough sys- 
tem." By it, fifty-six boroughs were wholly dis- 
franchised, and thirty -one partially. Forty-three 

1 > I i-y. 312. 



THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. < i 

new ones were created, twenty-two of which 
return two members, and the remainder one 
member each. By these salutary changes, and 
others relating to property qualifications for 
voting, the power of the crown, and of the differ- 
ent members composing the aristocracy, has 
been very much diminished in procuring the 
election of members, while the middle classes 
have risen to greater importance, and become 
vested with a larger proportion of political 
power. Thus greater equality is given to the 
principle of representation, and its more perfect 
results produced. 



THE mUTISIl CONSTITUTION. 



CHAPTER IV. 



ITS PRESENT WORKINGS- 



Having traced the history of the British 
constitution : 1st. In its sources. 2d. In its char- 
ters. 3d. In the origin and growth of that great 
national council which ultimately became its 
parliament, we are now prepared to examine its 
present workings. 

In speaking, however, of the British consti- 
tution we are not to understand that, as in the 
United States, and in the different States, there 
iA» any written instrument which arranges and 
defines its different powers. England's constitu- 
tion, like her common law. is unwritten. It is the 
gradual growth of centuries. Both that and the 
common law have been so many developments of 
human reason in its most practical forms ; as the 
necessities of human progress, and the exigencies 
of advancing society have from time to time 
demanded. In America, the written constitu- 
tion is the fundamental law in subjection to 



ITS PRESENT WORKINGS. 79 

which all legislation takes place. In Great 
Britain the great charter, the petition of right, 
the declaration of rights, and certain great prin- 
ciples acknowledged as lying at the foundation 
of all governmental action, altogether constitute 
what may be termed the British constitution. 
Although, therefore, the king and parliament 
are omnipotent; and an act which receives the 
sanction of both lords and commons, and the 
assent of the king. Jbecomes in form a valid and 
binding statute ; yet. if it contravenes any of 
those great principles, and thus sins against the 
genius and spirit of the government, it is uncon- 
stitutional and void. 

The following are the points to be kept in 
view in the working of the British constitution: 

L. The distribution of political power in ref- 
erence to localization and centralization. 

"2. The co-ordinate branches of which the 
central power is composed. 

3. The powers lodged in each. 

4. The checks which each one is capable of 
exercising against the others. 

1. The distribution of political power in ref- 
erence to localization and centralization. We 



80 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

have noticed the contests between royalty and the 
commons as the feudal aristocracy declined, and 
in most governments the ultimate triumph of roy- 
alty attended by a more or less complete central- 
ization. The establishment and exercise of pure 
royalty is consistent onlv with a high degree of 
centralization. 

J > \ this term is meant a government proceed- 
ing entirely from the central power. It i> not 
necessarily a despotism, or a monarchy. An 
aristocracy, or any other form of government, 
in which all political power centers in one com- 
mon head, whether in a cabinet or a general 
council, is a centralized government. Not only 
is the political power felt and exercised through 
the whole society, but all the officials, also, are 
appointed by, and derive all their power from, 
the same source. The most intensely central- 
ized government is the severest despotism. In 
such, no local power exists to counteract the 
exercise of the central power. 

On the other hand, the exercise of well de- 
fined local powers is an important, perhaps 
an essential, element in the composition of a free 
government. They operate as a most salutary 



ITS PRESENT WORKINGS. 81 

check upon the unrestrained oppressive action ot 
the central power. They essentially modify it 
in its exercise, and within constitutional and 
well defined limits, are in the highest degree 
beneficial. In this country the political power 
exercised in the school districts, the towns, vil- 
lages, cities, and counties, affords a salutary 
modification to that exercised by the State ; and, 
higher still, that possessed by the State, to that 
exercised by the United States. 

In England local power was early in asserting 
its claims. It was bequeathed to western Eu- 
rope by the German races. Among the Saxons 
each local district had, in local matters, the gov- 
ernment of itself. The county court, so early 
established in England, so purely local in its offi- 
cers and jurisdiction, so independent in its sphere 
of action, has contributed largely to restrain the 
action of the central power. 

The object, however, is not alone to restrain, 
or even to modify. It is to devolve upon local 
authorities the exercise of those powers that are 
purely of a local character, and affecting local 
objects. The relief of the poor, the repair of 
roads and bridges, the preservation of the peace, 



82 THE I'.KITISII CONSTITUTION. 

the administration of justice, and a multitude of 
other local acts are effected through these mean-. 
Ajmong these are also included the judicial and 
administrative powers confided to justices of the 
peace, and the executive power exercised by the 
sheriff. The county courts, with a few excep- 
tions, must try all causes not exceeding A?20. 

" There are almost innumerable other 
spheres of political action, each comparatively 
humble and limited in itself, but collectively, of 
infinite importance, on account of the universal- 
ity of their operation." and the daily and hourly 
duties and interests of every man's life which 
they affect. Every parish has its vestry : that is 
to say, an assembly, where the inhabitants of 
a parish meet together for the dispatch of the 
affairs and business of the parish. Every borough 
has its town council, every poor law union has its 
board of guardians. Each of these is a deliber- 
ative, a legislative, and a taxing body. In each 
of these, the elections of various functionaries 
are conducted ; and many of them are them- 
selves representative bodies, varied and renewed 
by general annual elections." 



ITS PRESENT WORKINGS. S3 

In the election and service of these local offi- 
cials, generally two tacts strike ns : 

1. The electors of all such arc required to 
have some property qualification.* 

2. With few exceptions, the local authorities, 
both in town and county, receive no salary. It 
is understood to be every man's duty to aid in 
the maintaining of good order, and in sustaining 
the social economy of the district in which he 
resides. 

Several results flow from these local organi- 
zations : 

1. It is a government within a government, 
both in its administrative and judicial functions. 

2. It affords opportunities to ambitious as- 
pirants, to expend, on a small scale, those 
energies which would otherwise be unemployed, 
or exert a hurtful influence. 

3. It gives opportunities to boisterous spirits, 
to expend themselves without harm, and thus 
operates as a safety valve to conduct away 
innocently, what might otherwise produce ex- 
plosion and destruction. 

4. It serves as a school in which are con- 

a™¦Creasy, 339 



S4 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

stantly kept in training, those who may ulti- 
mately be transferred to higher spheres of use- 
fulness, and display themselves on the nation's 
theatre. 

.">. It keeps alive and nourishes in the homes 
of the English people that knowledge of* politi- 
cal transactions, and those feelings of freedom 
and independence that impart such strength and 
power to the English character. 

6. It affords ready facilities to organization, 
and aggressive resistance to all tyrannical ex- 
ercise of power. 

7. It constitutes so many independent cen- 
tres in which are discussed the proceedings of 
the central power, and so many distinct trib- 
unals sitting in judgment upon such proceed- 
ings. 

8. It is. therefore, the one principal source 
of that public opinion, which in England is so 
omnipotent on all political questions. 

!A». It is a development of that self-governing 
spirii of the English people which enables them 
to administer correctives to misgovernment. and 
even to continue on their accustomed course, 
when by the resignation of the ministry, the 



ITS PRESENT WORKINGS. 85 

machinery of the central government stands 
still. 

These several local administrations are di- 
rectly connected with the general government 
by their representation in the house of com- 
mons. This leads to the consideration of the 
elections to that house. 

The reform bill of 1832, as we have already 
seen, corrected many of the evils growing out 
of the old rotten borough system. There is 
still, however, by no means an equality of rep- 
resentation of the commons in parliament. But 
the approach towards it is so considerable, the 
rotten boroughs so many of them disfranchised, 
and the base of representation so widened, 
that the power of the crown in procuring the 
election of members, and thus controlling the 
action of parliament, is very much diminished. 

Another fact we have also to notice, and 
that is, the property qualification necessary to 
constitute an elector. The right of voting for 
borough representation is limited to the house- 
holder who takes and resides in a ten pound 
house, while that of voting for a county repre- 
sentative requires only a forty shilling freehold. 



86 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

The practical resull of this has been thai in the 
general flection of L852, it is estimated that 
something more than one man in every five in 
England and Wales exercised the elective fran- 
chise.* The number elected and composing 
the house of commons amounts to the large 
number of. 658; Hut of this number there are 
seldom over five-sixths who attend. f 

The central power in Great Britain, in its ex- 
ecutive, legislative, administrative, and ultimate 
judicial functions, is exercised through the king, 
lords and commons. These are the great co-or- 
dinate branches of the government. It is in 
the powers lodged in each of these respectively, 
and the checks which each is capable of exer- 
cising against the others, that we are to find the 
solution of the problem so long sought for, and 
here for the first time found, how it is possible 
to confer powers and energies of unlimited ex- 
tent, and yet throw around them such safe- 
guards as entirely to protect human freedom 
from the severity of their exercise. 

Of these co-ordinate branches, the crown may 
well claim the first place. The crown is su- 

a™¦Creasy, 81? tBrougham. 11'. 317 



ITS PRESENT WORKINGS. 87 

preme. Its wearer and owner is an essential 
part of the sovereign legislative power. It is 
the king who issues his writs to the sheriffs of 
the different counties, commanding them to 
cause a return of members to parliament. . Thai 
body convenes in obedience to his call. He is 
the nation's chief magistrate and all other mag- 
istrates act by his commission. 

With the king is lodged the executive 
power. As executive he has the appointing 
power. In each county he appoints : 

1. The lord-lieutenant, who represents the 
sovereign in his rights and powers as chief of 
the old common law military force of each 
county.* 

2. The sheriff, who is the civil executive offi- 
cer of the county. 

3. The justices of the peace, who are 
charged with the performance of both judicial 
and administrative duties. All these we have 
just mentioned act without pay.f 

He also appoints to all offices in the army 
and navy. He has the entire disposition, as 
commander in chief, of all those forces. 

a™¦Creasy, 328. Udem, :;::aˆ?.'. 



^ THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

He i> also externally, in dealings with other 
states, the visible representative of the majesty 
of the state. He exercises the sole prerogative 
of making war or peace. He enters into, and 
carries on, all negotiations, and forms all alli- 
ances. In judicial matters he has ever been 
regarded as the fountain of justice. He superin- 
tends the administration of the civil and criminal 
law. and confirms, or remits all sentences. 

His first business, upon receiving the crown, 
is to surround himself by constitutional and re- 
sponsible advisers. These carry on the entire 
administration in the name of the sovereign. 
They are about fifteen in number, and are call- 
ed ministers of state. They are privy council- 
lors, and together form the cabinet." The chief 
is the first lord of the treasury, called by way 
of distinction the premier, or prime minister. 

Another important cabinet officer is the 
chancellor of the exchequer, who is charged 
with the finances of the empire. There are also 
four secretaries of state, the home, foreign, 
colonial, and war. 

Another member of the cabinet is the lord 

I reasy, 327. 



ITS PRESENT WORKINGS. 89 

chancellor, who is intrusted with the great seal, 
and is the keeper of the king's conscience. 

Theoretically all the members of the cabinet 
may be selected by the king from among any 
of his subjects. 

But practically his choice is quite limited. 
His ministers can only conduct the government 
and rule through majorities in parliament. 
They must, therefore, belong to the party 
which is dominant in parliament. They must 
be, at least several of them, members of parlia- 
ment, and gifted with powers adequate to se- 
curing majorities there. The moment the min- 
istry are outvoted in parliament, they have no 
other alternative than to resign. Another cabi- 
net must be formed, composed the more gen- 
erally by those of the opposite party, who in 
their turn, must keep with them the parlia- 
mentary majority. 

The parliament, exclusive of the crown, con- 
sists of two houses, the lords and commons. 
The latter is elective, and its power reposes on 
the representative system. When a new par- 
liament is to be summoned, a writ, under the 
great seal, is issued to the sheriff of each 
4* 



'.'<! THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

county,* requiring him to cause the election of 
the county representatives, and also of those of 
each city and borough within his shire that re- 
turns members. The sheriff then issues his pre- 
cepts to the head of each of those municipal 
constituencies, who return the same to him 
with the names of* the persons elected, of all 
which a general return is made to the lord chan- 
cellor. 

The lords, composing the upper house, con- 
stitute a permanent branch of the legislature, 
subject to little fluctuations or changes. They 
sit in their own right, f but may be considered 
as representing their powerful families and im- 
mediate connections, as also all the great land 
owners in the country. The house of lords con- 
sists of peers, both spiritual and temporal. The 
prelates, equally with the barons, are entitled to 
.sit in the house, the former by virtue of the 
sees which they respectively hold. 

The crown possesses a prerogative, in refer- 
ence to the house of lords, which may be some- 
what dangerous in its exercise. This relates to 
the power of creating peers to an unlimited ex- 

*Creasy, 380. t Brougham. Ill, 804. 



ITS PRESENT WORKINGS. 91 

tent. This may, mid indeed on several occa- 
sions has been exercised to influence the proceed- 
ings in parliament.'"' The sudden creation of 
twelve peers in the reign of queen Anne carried 
a question of importance in the house of lords. 
So it would be possible to carry any question 
through that house, by the creation of a neces- 
sary number of new peers. That necessity. 
however, could only arise where the king - and 
commons were on one side and the upper house 
on the other. The passage of the reform bill of 
1S32 came very near requiring the exercise of 
this extraordinary prerogative. It has. how 
ever, never been exercised to the injury of the 
country. 

The commons alone possess, or rather exer- 
cise, the right of originating supply bills, or 
any involving the necessity of taxation. The 
upper house has never abandoned its claim to 
originate and alter money bills, as well as the 
lower; but in practice the right has never been 
there asserted, the commons alone having origi- 
nated every measure of supply. As the lords 
originate no money bills, so they exercise no 

a™¦Brougham, III. 307. 



'a– aˆ?2 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

(lower to alter or amend those sent up from 
the commons,* but cither wholly accept or re- 
ject them. This all important instrument of 
power and remedial agent, the commons keep 
exclusively to themselves. 

There is also another point on which the 
commons claim the exclusive right of originating 
measures, + and that relates to the election of its 
own members. They assert this as an inherent 
right, and also as inalienable, maintaining that 
the house cannot convey it to any other body. 

The laws are administered by the different 
courts, and with the exception of the judges in 
the ecclesiastical courts, and some other trifling 
exceptions.^; the crown has the exclusive power 
of appointing all the judges. Their tenure is 
for life or during good behavior. They are ir- 
removable except by a joint address of the two 
houses of parliament, and as this requires, in 
addition, the assent of the crown. i.t is practical- 
ly a statute, having the concurrence of the 
whole three branches of the legislature. Thus 
the common law judges, although named by the 

aˆ?Brougham. III. 305. tldem. 30fi. {Idem, 310. 



ITS PRESENT WORKINGS. 93 

crown, are, nevertheless, independent in the 
tenure of their office. 

The lord chancellor, who has only civil juris- 
diction, and who as, keeper of the great seal, 
and the king's conscience, forms a member of 
the cabinet,* holds his place only during plea- 
sure, but the other equity judges, the master of 
the rolls, the vice chancellors, and the masters 
in chancery, all hold their offices during life or 
good behavior. 

To guard still further the purity of the 
bench, the judges are disabled from sitting in 
the house of commons. 

aˆ?"Thus" says Lord Brougham, "'the judicial 
power, pure and unsullied, calmly exereised 
amidst the uproar of contending parties by men 
removed above all contamination of faction, 
all participation in either its fury or its delu- 
sions, held alike independent of the crown, the 
parliament and the multitude, and only to be 
shaken by the misconduct of those who wield it, 
forms a mighty zone which girds our social 
pyramid round about, connecting the loftier 

a™¦Brougham, III, 371. 



94 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

and narrower, with the humbler and broader 
regions of the structure, binding the whole 
together, and repressing alike the encroach- 
ments and the petulance of any of its parts.' 1 

With the commons alone lies the power of 
impeachment, but that body has no power to 
try it. Its trial is before the house of lords, 
and its ultimate decision rests with that body. 
And so other judicial powers rest with the 
house of lords. It is the court of last resort, of 
ultimate appellate jurisdiction in all cases of law 
and equity from the whole united kingdom. 
This house always contains peers who till, or 
have tilled, the highest stations in both courts of 
law and equity. These are commonly called 
the law lords, and practically it is those who 
have the entire decision of the ease- brought 
before the house. 

Thus of the three estates of British realm 
we have : 

1. The crown, which, whatever may in for- 
mer times have Ween claimed of its existing by 
divine right, by the grace of God, can certainly. 
since the act of settlement in 1689. lay claim to 
no higher warrant than the .joint will of the 



ITS PRESENT WORKINGS. t>5 

aristocracy and people of England. In this we 
have centered the executive power a large pro- 
portion of the administrative, which is exercised 
through the ministry composing the cabinet. 

The crown is also a neeessary clement in thq 
composition of the legislative power. Xo act of 
parliament can claim the force of a law be tore 
it receives the sanction of the crown. It has 
thus a veto upon all the legislation of the lords 
and commons. 

The king's person is inviolable. Xo legal 
proceeding can be instituted against him. The 
received maxim is, that the il king can do no 
wrong." But the king only acts through his 
constitutional advisers, his ministers. And al- 
though he is not responsible yet they are ; and 
through them his administration is made ac- 
countable. 

aˆ?2. The house of commons, a representative 
body, standing in the place, and wielding the 
political powers of the people of Great Britain. 
Their function is chiefly legislative. They may 
originate every legislative measure. They 
must originate all supply bills, requiring the 
necessity of taxation. They have also the 



96 THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION 

power of impeachment. They are the changing 
element 

:!. The house of lords, the permanent ele- 
nii'iit in British legislation. Its habits, interests, 
prejudices, .-ill tend to render it a conservative 
body. It stands between the crown and the 
people, ready to throw its weight into either 
scale that may be required to adjust aright the 
balance. 

In the individuals composing this body, is to 
be found the highest style of culture ; the most 
illustrious rank united with vast possessions, 
and when to these are added great capacity, en- 
larged statesmanlike views. ;i power of origin- 
ating all legislative measures except money 
bill-, and the highest judicial power in the na- 
tion, we must recognize in it an estate in the 
highest degree important in the British constitu- 
tion. These three together compose the parlia- 
ment, "that parliament of Great Britain, 
which." says Edmund Burke, "sits at the head 
of her extensive empire in two capacities, one. 
as the local legislation of this island, providing 
for all things at home, immediately, and by no 
other instrument than the executive power. The 



ITS PRESENT WORKINGS. 9? 

other, and, I think, her nobler capacity, is what 
I call her imperial character, in which, as from 
the throne of heaven, she superintends all the 
seVeral inferior legislatures, and guides and 
controls them without annihilating any." 

The judicial exists independent of the legis- 
lative and executive, charged with functions, of 
all others perhaps the most necessary for the 
preservation of the state, the administration of 
the law ; and looked to in times of storm and 
peril as the ultimate conservative power in the 
state. 

A brief allusion to the evils to be guarded 
against, and the checks which the constitution 
provides as the safeguards against their occur- 
rence, is all that now remains for our considera- 
tion. 

These evils are threefold: 

1. The subversion of the upper and lower 
houses resulting in the supremacy of the king, 
the establishment of a despotism. 

2. The subversion of the crown and the com- 
mons, and the supremacy of the lords ; the es- 
tablishment of an aristocracy. 

3. The subversion of the crown and the 

G 5 



98 the British constitution. 

lords, and the supremacy of the commons ; the 
establishment of a democracy. 

To comprehend fully the force of the checks 
by which each and all these evils may be con- 
stitutionally averted, we must understand that 
acts of parliament constitute the fundamental 
law of the British empire. That they are om- 
nipotent, and are to Great Britain what both 
constitutional and legislative provisions are to 
us. We must also understand further that no 
act of parliament can be deemed complete, and 
have conceded to it the force of law unless it 
has received the assents of the three estates, the 
king, lords, and commons. Now let us proceed 
to inquire what checks each one of these three 
co-ordinate branches has upon the others ; what 
means of defence the constitution has placed in 
the power of each,' so that that integrity of each 
can be fully preserved. 

The crown is amply provided: 

1. By its large executive and administrative 
powers ; its power of appointments, its com- 
mand of all armies and navies. 

2. By its power of increasing the house of 
lords by the creation of new peers, thus, if 



ITS PRESENT WORKINGS. 99 

necessary, giving the upper house a preponder- 
ance over the lower. 

3. By its veto, thus arresting and destroying 
in its progress towards maturity every act 
which it deems essentially prejudicial to itself, 
or to the country, although it may have passed. 
and received the sanction of both houses. 

4. By its power of proroguing or dissolving 
parliament at any moment when it deems that 
the public exigencies so require. 

The house of lords is sufficiently protected: 

1. By the immense personal influence of its 
members, arising from their great wealth, com- 
manding talents, and powerful connections. 

2. By its constituting the high court of im- 
peachments, and the highest appellate court in 
the realm. 

3. By its constitutional negative, or veto, 
which it may interpose upon any and all acts 
which come up before it from the house of com- 
mons. 

It must be admitted, however, that the house 
of lords has a less amount of constitutional 
power, can put into operation less effective 



100 rHE BRITISH CONSTITUTION. 

checks that are purely constitutional, than 
either one or the other co-ordinate branches. 
The commons are amply protected: 

1. By their power of impeaching every mem- 
ber of the king's cabinet. 

2. By the negative, or veto power, which 
they can put upon every act which comes up 
before them. This is now considered only in 
reference to their own protection. 

3. By their power of changing the entire 
policy of the crown, and compelling it to adopt 
a different policy, or to resort to the hazardous 
measure of dissolving the parliament, by voting 
down any government measure, thus leaving 
the ministers in the minority, and compelling a 
change in the cabinet, or stopping the wheels of 
government until such change shall be made. 

4. By refusing all supplies to carry on the 
government until all the grievances the}* com- 
plain of shall be redressed. 

In full view of the gradual growth of the 
British constitution : of its localizing and cen- 
tralizing forces: of the arrangement of its co-or- 
dinate branches; of the powers assigned to each 
branch ; and of the strong checks possessed by 



ITS PRESENT WORKINGS. 101 

each as against the others; it may be .safely pro- 
nounced that of all efforts hitherto made by the 
race in so creating and arranging the political 
forces that enter into the governmental element 
as to secure their greatest harmony of action, 
no other ever devised has evinced such deep 
sagacity, such profound forecast, and such 
wealth of wisdom. To it must come the great 
statesmen of all countries, and of all times, to 
study the science of government. Under 
its strong guaranties repose in perfect safety 
those indomitable forces that in all quarters of 
the world are swaying the sceptre of universal 
empire ; that colossal power whose morning 
drum-beat, following the course of the sun, and 
keeping company with the hours, encircles the 
globe daily with the martial airs of England. 



INDEX. 



Anglo Saxon, burghs, 10; church establishment, 13; classes 
of people, 8; government, 11, 12; institutions, 7; polit- 
ical (ii visions, 9; revenue, 13; townships, 9 

Assemblies, Norman, 41. 

Barebones Parliament, 68. 

Barons, Council of, anions the Normans, 41. 

Pull of Rights, 74. 

British Constitution, checks to evils, 98; evils of, 97 ; mag- 
na charta, 26-32; new charter by Henry III., 32: 
points in its workings, 79 ; steps in its growth, 24; un- 
written, 78. 

British guarantees wrested from the king, 24. 

Brunswick, house of 73. 

Cabal, ministry, 71. 

Cabinet, the, 88. 

Central power, how exercised, 86. 

Ceorls, or freemen 8. 

( hancellor, vice, tenure of office, 93. 

Charles I., 66, 67. 

Charles II., 70. 

Charters, by Henry I., 26; by Henry II., 26 ; by Henry 
III, 32; by Stephen. 26; by William, 25; confirmed 
by Edward, 35; established, 37. 

Civil War, 32. 

Clarendon. Lord, prime minister, 71. 

Clement V., 36. 

Commons, consulted in national affairs, 52; elections to, 85; 
first rise into importance, 42 ; functions of, 95 ; how 
protected, 100; no equality of representation in, 85; 
powers of, 50, 57, 91, 92, 94. 
(102) 



INDEX. 103 

Crown, the, amply protected, 98, 99; cabinet of, 88; its 
powers, 87; prerogative of, 90. 

Deputies, county and borough, 42 

Edward I., 154-36. 

Edward III., 54, 55. 

Electors in counties and boroughs, 48. 

England, common law in, 20 ; condition in twelfth century, 
22 

Feudal Aristocracy, 61. 

Feudalism, its results, 19. 

Free Government, nature of, 39. 

Free. Institutions, under the Tudors, 65. 

Government administrated by, 94, 95; centralized, 80; 
charters, 26-28 ; checks to the evils of, 98 ; executive, 
39; free local powers essential to, 81; growth of, 25; in 
the twelfth century, 12; judicial, 39; legislative, 39; 
of the Anglo Saxons, 11, 12; powers of, 40. 

Habeas Corpus Act, 70. 

Henry VIII., absolute, 61. 

Industry, influence of, 63. 

James I., 66. 

James II., 71. 

John I., 32, 33. 

Judges, how appointed, 92. 

Judicial functions. 97. 

King, among Anglo Saxons, 11; reigns by act of Parlia- 
ment, 74. 




